So in this video I'm going to show you how to utilize the H2 database council.
So first thing I'm gonna do is go ahead and start the application.
So I'm just gonna click here and run the Spring Boot web application and we can see that it starts up
fairly quickly so we are up and running and we can see here in the council output that Tomcat started
to port 80 80.
Now I'm going to toggle over to Chrome
and here you can see local host 80 80 so that's where Tomcat is listening.
And if you go to the URL h2-console, that is where the database console is.
You can see here I'm getting a white label error page.
This is the standard Spring Boot error page and we're seeing that we're getting a not found status
404 which is expected at this point.
Now if I come back over here to IntelliJ, I need to do a stop spring coming new to application properties.
I'm just going to type H2 and you can see that we do have several settings in the H2 console enable
is default to false.
There was a period in time where a Spring Boot was enabling that by default.
True.
But they made a change of some I forget what a release it was but that is now set to false and there's
a couple other settings that we can adjust in here.
Not going to get into those at this point but the primary thing is we want to take this enable it and
set it to true and then we do need to restart Spring Boot.
So I stopped.
I'm just getting started again for the setting to take effect. Now we can see that we are up and running
again and taking a look at the console output.
Here we can see here that we do have output.
So we are saying that it's available at H2 console. In this here, database available at this jdbc URL.
This is very important.
So that's at H jdbc:h2:mem  that means an in-memory database and the schema name is
gonna be testdb. So that's very important
to  set up. I toggle over to Chrome
now. I'm just going to do a refresh since I already had that URL. And here you can see that we have
a log in page, defaults to username as a password of normal.
But what you want to watch out for here is this JDBC URL. I'll make sure that matches what we had before
because what chances are if you are running this the first time you might get something different there.
So definitely watch this. I see people have a lot of problems with this as far as having that. Because
what happens if you have a different database string in there, different connect string, your the way
H2 works is just going to create the database for you in memory and you're not going to see any
of the tables.
So this is a very important piece right here. So I'm going to do is click on Connect.
Now we can see the database that has been created by Hibernate. So Hibernate as defaulting into a create
mode. Just looking at our JPA entities and running the necessary rescue all statements to create our
database tables.
So now if I just come over here to publisher, I clicked on publisher. I'm to run that.
And here we can see the properties that I set up there for that.
So I clear this. We can also go to author and run that. Now we can see we've got Eric Evans and Ron
Johnson that have been created in the author table. And if I clear this, come over to book, run that, we
can see the table that was created for the book.
So we are in fact loading data into in-memory database. This H2 Console is a very handy tool to use
especially when you're developing. If you're going through and altering your domain objects, you can
get feedback pretty quick about what's going on in the database. So this also helps you with the debugging.
So you have something odd happening, sometimes it's important to go look at the database and see what's
really going on.
So just a recap, we toggle back over to IntelliJ. To enable this, all you need to do is add this line
spring.h2.console.enabled=true and then you'll see this console auto configuration. Here, this is
very important.
So the URL is going to be by default h2-console and then the database connect string, this
jdbc:h2:mem: testdb so that is where you go. Chances are the first time you're
running that. there's a good chance at the jdbc connect URL will be different and if you connect
you're not going to see any of the tables or any of the data that's been created and to be in memory
database that Spring Boot is using.